---
title: "Uniaxial compressive strain along c-axis elevates the performance of LiMn2O4 cathode in lithium-ion batteries"
collection: publications
permalink: /publications/2024-10-19-paper-lmo-number-5
date: 2024-07-30
venue: 'JES'
paperurl: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S2352152X2402084X'
citation: 'Xiaozhen Chen, Zijing Wan, Ziqi Zhou, Xiaobing Luo, Dongwei Xu, Uniaxial compressive strain along c-axis elevates the performance of LiMn~2~O~4~ cathode in lithium-ion batteries, Journal of Energy Storage, Volume 94, 2024, 112498, ISSN 2352-152X'
thumbnail: /images/LMO.png
---
In the era of low-carbon economy, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are gradually becoming one of the most important energy storage components in the 21st century due to their high energy density. As one of the most important component of LIBs, cathode materials directly affects the performance of LIBs. Currently, commercially available cathode materials mainly include layered LiCoO2, spinel LiMn2O4 (LMO), olivine LiFePO4 and LiFexMn1-xPO4, as well as NCM ternary material, among which LMO stands out as a cost-effective and environmentally friendly option with moderate energy density. However, its capacity easily decays after cycling, which greatly limits its industrialization. Many researchers are working on revealing the mechanism of capacity decay. Using advanced structural analysis techniques, Hao et al. found that the capacity decay of LMO is attributed to the structural collapse along the (1 1 1) plane, which is caused by micro-cracks during the electrochemical cycling. The formation of micro-cracks is associated with the brittleness of materials and the lattice mismatch caused by the Jahn-Teller effect of Mn3+. The occurrence of Jahn-Teller effect within LMO leads to the formation of a distorted tetragonal crystal system that is incompatible with the original cubic crystal system, generating lattice strain and distortion. This in turn destroys the structural integrity and effective contact between particles, resulting in the formation of cracks that adversely affect Li+ diffusion and inter-particle conductivity, ultimately causing a loss in capacity. In contrast, the reinforcement of ductility serves to mitigate the probability of micro-cracks in electrode materials during repetitive charging and discharging cycles, leading to circumvent the rapid deterioration of battery capacity. Additionally, oxygen release is observed during LIBs cycling process, and the resulting structural changes can also lead to capacity degradation. Overall, the structural changes appeared in LMO cathode during cycling lead to irreversible consumption, including oxygen release reaction and the mechanical fragmentation caused by micro-cracks, resulting in capacity decay. Furthermore, this is accompanied by a decrease in lithium-ion conductivity.  

The rate performance of LMO cathode directly affects the reliability and electrochemical performance of the battery at high rates, which can be improved by increasing its lithium-ion conductivity. Therefore, further researches on LMO material are necessary to enhance their lithium-ion conductivity and cycling stability, ultimately enhancing the overall performance and industrial feasibility of LMO-based batteries.  

Strain engineering is a highly effective approach for tuning the physical and electrochemical properties of materials in battery and catalytic applications. For instance, Hao et al.successfully prevented brittle fracture induced by Li+ diffusion by applying pre-strain to the electrode-collector structure. The diffusion coefficient of lithium ions in LiCoO2 can also be improved by tensile strain. The performance of LMO cathode in LIBs after applying external strain has also been researched. It is feasible to regulate the structure, magnetic, and electrical properties of LMO using externally applied strain, which holds great promise in addressing the issue of capacity decay LIBs. Nevertheless, the impact of strain on critical aspects of LMO as a cathode material for LIBs, encompassing Li+ diffusion performance, Jahn-Teller effect, oxygen release reaction, and material brittleness, remains uncertain. Hence, a systematical and comprehensive study is urgently needed. In our research, we aim to mitigate the capacity degradation of LMO while simultaneously improving its rate performance through strain engineering.  

In this study, we employ DFT + U calculations to investigate the impact of 0 ∼ −4% c-axis compressive strain on the capacity decay and rate performance of on this study, we employ DFT + U calculations to investigate the impact of 0 ∼ −4% c-axis compressive strain on the capacity decay and rate performance of orthorhombic LMO in an anti-ferro-magnetic (AFM) ordering. It is found that c-axis compressive strain could alleviate the capacity decay by regulating brittleness and also improve the rate performance by lowering the Li+ diffusion energy barrier, in other words, raising the lithium-ion conductivity. Meanwhile, its electronic conductivity will also increase correspondingly with strains. The improvement in cycle life and electrochemical cycling performance is helpful in practical application. This work could spark new ideas on strain engineering in LIBs for performance improvement.

**Highlights**  

1) Enhanced Ductility: compressive strain up to -4% reduces the brittleness of LiMn2O4. 

2) Boosted Ion Conductivity: strain lowers the Li+ diffusion barrier, enhancing battery rate performance.

3) Improved Electronic Properties: reduced bandgap due to strain increases electronic conductivity.

